Peter: Lets have another look at converting
roll/pitch/yaw angles to a rotation matrix.
We use the function that we introduced a moment
ago; rpy2r, and I’m going to pass in a roll
angle of 0.3 radians, a pitch radians of pi/2
radians, and a yaw angle of 0.5 radians. And
as before we have an orthonormal rotation
matrix.
Now I’m going to convert that back to roll/pitch/yaw
angles. To do that I use the inverse function
tr2rpy and I pass in the rotation matrix that
we just computed, and here are the roll/pitch/yaw
angles. You’ll notice they are quite different
to those that we passed in. The middle angle,
the pitch angle is the same, its pi/2. The
roll angle has changed from 0.3 to 0, and
the yaw angle has changed form 0.5 to 0.8.
If you are sharp you’ll have noticed that
0.8 is the sum of 0.3 and 0.5. So one of our
angles has got 0, and the yaw angle has gone
to the sum of the original roll and yaw angles.
What’s going on here?
This is a condition known as singularity,
and it occurs in any three-angle sequence
representation of an orientation. It occurs
for roll/pitch/yaw angles, it occurs for Euler
angles. It always occurs when the middle angle
takes on a particular value, and for roll/pitch
/yaw angles the pitch angle is equal to pi/2,
leads to the singularity condition.
This condition is also known by the rather
unusual name of gimbal lock. If you’ve ever
seen the movie Apollo 13 you will have heard
that term used.
Apollo 13 is actually one of my favourite
movies. It’s a dramatisation of the very
famous Apollo 13 mission to the moon back
in 1970.
Astronaut: Ok Houston we’ve had a problem
here.
Ground Controller: This is Houston, say again
please.
Astronaut: Alright Houston we’ve had a problem.
We’ve had a Main B Bus undervolt.
Peter: There was a faulty component built
into the spacecraft and eventually caused
a massive explosion. The moon landing was
aborted and the astronauts were really lucky
to get back to earth alive.
The explosion presented the astronauts and
NASA ground staff with all kinds of problems;
saving the crew’s oxygen, removing excess
carbon dioxide, dealing with power shortage,
and devising a strategy for getting the astronauts
safely back to Earth.
A rather more obscure element of this dramatic
crisis is gimbal lock. It is a pretty esoteric
term. It’s a very geeky term, and I'm pretty
sure it's also the first and perhaps the last
time it will ever be mentioned in a Hollywood
movie!
The problem first of all was picked up by
the ground controllers, as they monitor the
crew onboard trying to stabilise the stricken
spacecraft.
Ground Controller: 13, Houston. We see you
getting close to gimbal lock there. We’d
like you to bring up all Quad C’s on Main
A. Quad C1, C2, C3 and C4 on Main A, and also
bring B3 and B4 up on Main A.
Peter: The pilot was trying desperately to
keep it away from the Gimbal lock condition.
Ground Controller: 13, Houston. Do you read?
Astronaut: Yeah we got it.
Peter: The Apollo spacecraft’s flying controls
were something like those seen in this NASA testbed.
This gimbal lock condition is related to the
example that we were looking at in MATLAB
a moment ago but in this case, in the NASA
case, they were dealing with real physical
gimbals. So let's have a look at physical
gimbals and how they work.
A Gimbal is a simple mechanism that's used
to keep a delicate instrument like a compass
or a clock, level when it's mounted on a vehicle
or a vessel that's undergoing considerable
motion. And the first example here is a compass
in we call a two axis Gimbal, so the compass
can rotate around this particular axis and
then that whole assembly rotates around this
axis. Or if the base of the compass was mounted
on the ship and the ship is rolling and pitching
then the compass is going to remain level.
The same for this clock indicated here, its
first free to rotate around this axis and
then it's free to rotate around this axis.
If I place this box on the table in my cabin
on board a sailing ship then the clock is
going to remain level even though the ship
is undergoing quite considerable motion. This
last example is a little bit more complex
it contains what we call a three axis Gimbal.
In the first case then, the compass is free
to rotate around this axis and then that whole
assembly is free to rotate around this axis
and finally all that inner assembly is
free to rotate around this axis.
Gimbals are widely used in engineering systems
and this is a schematic of a gimbal that was
part of the navigation system for the Apollo
lunar module that was referred to earlier
in the movie. The key component is what's
called the stabilized platform and it consists
of three gyroscopes spinning quickly and they
keep this particular assembly shown here in
blue at a fixed orientation with respect to
the universe. Now because the vehicle in which
it's mounted is going to be rotating and translating,
then we need some way to mechanically connect
the space craft to the stable platform but
in such a way that the motion of the space
craft does not introduce any torque or force
on the stable platform. So the way to do that
is to use a series of gimbals so the first
gimbal is a rotation around this axis here
and then that whole assembly is free to rotate
around this axis and then finally all that
assembly is free to rotate around this axis.
What this allows is really important, if we
measure the angles of the shaft in each of
the gimbals then that tells us the orientation
of the vehicle with respect to the stable
platform. And that's how this vehicle is able
to determine it's orientation in space. The
problem occurs when the angle of the second
gimbal approaches plus or minus 90 degrees
and that's the condition referred to as Gimbal
Lock which was mentioned in the movie clip.
For space craft navigation it works something
like this, we have this inner element which
is referred to as a stable platform, it's
got three orthogonal gyroscopes on it and
what that means is that the platform maintains
a constant orientation with respect to the
universe. It's a very impressive thing, the
space craft then is attached to the other
side of the gimbal mechanism. So as the space
craft's orientation changes over time by reading
the gimbal angles we can determine the orientation
of the space craft with respect to the stable
platform whose orientation is a constant.
Let's consider the case where the orientation
of the vehicle is expressed in terms of roll,
pitch, yaw angles. We write this as a sequence
of elementary rotations, a rotation around
the X axis by the roll angle, rotation around
the Y axis by the pitch angle and a rotation
around the Z axis by the yaw angle. Now let's
consider what happens when the pitch angle
equals 90 degrees or pi on 2 radians. We
can write the expression like this, now the
pitch angle is equal to pi on 2 and with some
well known identities I can rewrite it in
this form. Now what we have is 2 consecutive
rotations around the X axis so I can write
this now as a single rotation around the X
axis. The amount of the rotation is R+Y, it's
the sum of the roll angle and the yaw angle
and there's a final constant rotation. What
this indicates is that now roll and yaw are
equivalent we can't tell one from another.
Another way to think about this mechanical
way in terms of the Gimbal mechanism itself
is to think that the axis of the first gimbal
and the third gimbal and now parallel to each
other and aligned. This is a mathematical
representation of the Gimbal lock phenomenon.
And it occurs when the angle of the middle
gimbal approaches pi on 2. This is the condition
that they were concerned about in the Apollo
13 clip.
So what this means is when you define your
coordinate system for any particular vehicle
and if you want to describe it's orientation
in terms of roll, pitch and yaw angles it's
important that the pitch angle is around 0
for the nominal configuration of your vehicle.
So if it's an aircraft then the pitch angle
would be 0 when it is in default horizontal configuration
or as if it was a rocket you would want to
make sure that the 0 pitch angle corresponded
to the condition of going straight up. You
need to ensure that the situation with the
pitch angle equals plus or minus 2 does not
occur during normal operating conditions.